okay so we're talking about sense
perception today and so most of us
realize automatically that has something
to do with our five senses and the five
senses come to us by sense organs and
you might think that's sort of where it
ends kind of thing No so you've got eyes
for vision you've got skin for touch and
you've got ears of hearing but we also
know that these sensors are connected to
brain somehow or other and so what we're
interested in is how these sensors can
give us knowledge about the world so
that's going to have something to do
with not only the sense organs
themselves so the eyes I might just
concentrate on vision for simplicity so
it's got something to do with the eyes
and it's got something to do with the
brain and it's also got something to do
with the thing that carries the messages
from the eyes to the brain so if someone
actually goes blind then there are three
ways that that could happen something
could go wrong with the eyes completely
something you'd go wrong with the brain
or something could go wrong with the
channel that carries the information
from the eyes to the brain so to use the
technical scientific jargon something to
go wrong with the visual cortex in the
brain something could go wrong with the
optic nerve carrying the messages
something could go wrong with the eyes
themselves what we also know is that we
don't know much about exactly how the
brain works generally but in particular
with this topic we don't exactly know
how sense perception works in the brain
we have a rough idea about the regions
where it happens exactly how it happens
we don't know we know that if something
goes wrong with your visual cortex let's
say you get a brain tumor in the visual
cortex will be very unfortunate in order
to survive a brain tumor in your visual
cortex the surgeon might have to remove
part of your visual cortex which could
mean that you are blind and we used to
think that was a full stop underline you
were no longer able to see but now we're
learning that you can actually learn to
see you again
so something or other if you've got
perfect guys and a perfect optic nerve
if a doctor REE connects the optic nerve
to a new part of the brain if your
visual cortex has been removed in
surgery for some reason you can learn to
see again this is not something that was
expected but it's being discovered
recently by surgeons and neuro
scientists and if you're interested in
learning more about that I'd look up
Norman Doidge who wrote a book called
from memory the brain that heals itself
incidentally he was on the ABC program
QA the other night I haven't seen it
myself but yeah he he's written about
this idea of neuro plasticity like
common sense about sensors so there are
the five senses apparently there are
five senses smell taste hearing touch
and sight how do they allow us to know
about the world well apparently the
story goes we can see here feel taste
and smell stuff so we get information
from the world around us and we were
able to know stuff to the extent we have
direct sensory perception of it so if
you've got an apple then you're able to
see the Apple because somehow you can
directly send to the Apple can't you
well it's not quite that simple like
consider the process of seeing now when
can't you see an up or wear when there's
not an apple in the room but imagine
there is an apple in the room when might
not you be able to see it when you're
blind ok well now imagine you've got
perfect vision and you're inside a room
and an apple is there and you're looking
straight at the Apple when might not you
be able to see it will matter all the
lights are out it's completely dark you
might not be able to see an apple they
might not like galb to feel it let's say
but imagine we're interested in the
question of vision and how vision works
so you can't see something that's right
in front of your eyes unless there's
light they're human beings need light to
be able to see ok so we've encountered
the first problem essentially with how
simple sense perception might be so you
need light ok so now imagine you're in
room you've got perfect vision you're
looking at an apple in this light
what does that all mean well when you
have direct sensory perception of an
apple are you really directly where what
is directly me directly sensing it what
could that mean what it means in the
case of vision is that light is entering
your eye it's not the applet enter in
your eye is it it's light so light
reflects off the Apple and then into
your eye and then from there actually it
goes through your eyeball goes the back
of your eyeball and it hits a part of
the DI structure called the retina in
the retinas this black thing when you're
looking to your friends eyes and you see
the center of the eye as black what
you're actually seeing is the the back
of their eye it's the photosensitive the
light-sensitive part of their eye and
it's black so it absorbs the light so
when you see something like an apple you
are seeing light reflected off the Apple
you're seeing light reflected off the
Apple I'll say that again because it's
important to note that you're not having
direct sensory perception of it are you
all you're doing is you're just
detecting some light anything else about
that you might be able to think about
how how that direct sensory perception
of stuff works with other senses just
consider something like hearing so when
you hear someone's voice what's actually
going on is that air particles are
vibrating at their mouth as air
particles continue to vibrate across the
room and then those air particles
vibrate next to their eardrum also
called the tympanic membrane and that
vibrates at the same frequency as what
their voice originally by the way that
so let's direct sensory perception of
someone else okay so all of that we're
taught about five senses but why five
well actually it goes back to ancient
Greeks specifically goes back to
Aristotle okay and he talked about the
fact that there were five senses in the
same way that Newton talked about seven
colors in the rainbow there are not
seven colors of the rainbow even though
we learn them we learn red orange yellow
green blue indigo violet but there are
reddish orange colors there are
yellowish blue colors that we don't
certainly give names to some people do
good names but Newton didn't but we
still talk about seven colors around by
well we still talk about five senses
even though there's not now consider
you've got a sense of balance now
balance actually comes to us via what's
called the vestibular system and that's
inside the ear but it's not hearing okay
you can hear perfectly well and yet
might not have a good sense of balance
so that's one since about proprio
reception is another one proprioception
is about knowing where your limbs are in
relation to one another so knowing where
your arms are at any moment any moment
in time so there aren't really five
times you can look those up on the
internet as well so in people say a
sixth sense you might very well say to
them yes I have a sixth sense sense of
balance ESP is not among them we'll talk
about that during another lesson so
scientifically there are more than
justified senses so here's sight that's
a real ly they're not particularly
pleasant and if you want to be a doctor
or work in the health fields get used to
pictures like this now I put that up
there just so we can see how complex the
structure is notice the orientation of
the eye there the light would have to
come into the eyeball and travels
through all these different structures
and somehow or other the light the light
gets converted into other kinds of
signals it doesn't get carried through
the tube the optic nerve how we see is a
complicated process by the time the
information gets to your brain it's not
light anymore so imagine you're looking
in an apple the Apple itself doesn't
enter your eye the light does and then a
light eventually is converted into some
other kind of signals in fact actually
convert it into electricity why are a
number of processes on debt to get to in
the moment and eventually gets the brain
where it's interpreted so at any point
between when the light leaves the Apple
through to it getting to your brain
thing can go wrong and so we're not
guaranteed along this chain or processes
of getting perfect information we might
miss star stuff might go wrong we're not
perfect creatures
so here we might talk a little bit about
precisely what works I starting at the
top left hand corner there we can see
the picture of the eyeball and the pupil
so imagine light coming into the pupil
and it goes through the lens once it
gets through the lens there it then
refracts through this part of the eye
the main eyeball it's filled with a
thing called a vitreous humor which is
not noted there but you can look up
vitreous humor it just means sort of
clear jelly and the light then passes to
the right now now in the rep there
things get really complicated because
the light has to get converted into
electricity somehow and the way this
happens is via chemistry and so in the
bottom right there I've got pictures of
two molecules one's called 11 sis
retinol and one's called our trans
retinal and if light hits the SIS
retinal then what happens is that it
turns into trans retinal and as it does
so it changes shape basically it goes
from being a boomerang shape to being a
straight shape okay so in going from a
boomerang or a bent shape molecule to a
straight shaped molecule it releases
electrons and the electrons then travel
along the nerves and then head to the
brain where their interpretive now the
point here is that when you're looking
at something not all the light that's
coming from that object that you're
looking at enters your eye that's the
first thing the next thing is the light
that does into your eye maybe not a
little bit makes it to the repler of the
light that heads to the retina and
actually strikes the retina not all of
it causes the sits retinal to turn into
trans retinal and so not all of the
light is causing electricity that you
created even when the electricity is
created in the nerves not all of those
nerve signals get all the way to the
brain now why am I saying all that well
I'm pointing out that our senses are not
perfectly reliable we know this from
science and so because we know that our
sensors are
perfectly reliable we can't expect to
have perfect or full or complete
knowledge of the world just by looking
so you hear that comment saying seeing
is believing well its most certainly not
okay if if belief means something that
we know has something that we endorse as
true because we have good reasons then
when we look at the world we can't
expect that all the time when we're
looking at the world that what we see is
what we should believe because we're not
getting all the information will never
get all the information we're not
perfect creatures we have to be aware of
this our sensors do fail us because our
sensors aren't perfect now that doesn't
mean that all hope is lost we just have
to be careful and that's why we have
subjects like science to be able to
correct for errors correct for mistakes
and so we have scientific instruments
let's say which allow us to make sure
that we're not missing anything if we're
looking at something carefully and all
of this is not to say that when you're
looking at your friend you're not
actually looking your friend of course
you are okay we're still able to use
language in the normal way this is just
a sign to the explanation as to why our
senses are not perfect probably
something in you already what is the
sense anyway well it's any sort of
detection system it's a system that
detects some physical phenomenon and so
around us there is sound and so we've
got ears to hear it and around us is
light so we've got eyes to see it and
there are odors there are gases and so
we've got noses smell it and so on but
are there other physical phenomena
around us that we can't detect well yes
we do know that like for example there
are colors of light we can't see
infrared ultraviolet microwaves they're
a kind of light radio waves are a kind
of light we can't see them with our eyes
but we've managed to develop scientific
instruments that can see them okay and
so in a sense
human beings can sense these things the
same as we there are certain frequencies
we can't hear that bats can hear them
how good are our sensors I've already
indicated to you that they're probably
not particularly good our hearing is
limited to the range of about twenty
Hertz to about 20,000 Hertz and it
depends upon the volume as to whether or
not you can hear that 20 Hertz or that
twenty thousand older people have worse
hearing than younger people
interestingly enough asthmatics have
higher frequency range than people who
don't have asthma it's probably up
something to do with genetics that
whatever the genetic problem is that
causes you to have asthma also on the
flip side has this good effect of
allowing you to hear higher frequencies
interesting site has a very narrow range
of wavelengths as well you can see
violet ran about 400 nanometers which is
400 billionths of a meter through to
read seven hundred millionth of a meter
but there are way more wavelengths of
light than that okay we can only see a
very narrow range touch we can feel a
large different ranges of physical
phenomena and a large different range of
what we say criteria within those
phenomena so for example temperature
comes to us through touch but so does
pressure come to us through touch our
temperature we can probably feel certain
things that are cold and very cold
through to a hot and very hot but it's
really hard to tell the difference when
it comes to temperature of something
that is five degrees Celsius compared to
six degrees Celsius or 32 compared to 31
okay sometimes you see on the weather
reports on the news you see it's 24
degrees but it feels like 21 degrees I
don't know exactly how they come up with
these things to be silly if you ask me
but the point here is that it's very
hard to tell the difference in
temperature once again that's a reason
for having science okay it's a reason
for having these things called
thermometers let's say for example game
now
smell is very strange it's not a range
of things so you don't smell things are
in a range but rather you smell discrete
different kinds of smell so in other
words you can smell things as chocolate
or not as chocolate or strawberry or not
as strawberry I say there it's the
oldest sense what I should go back when
I say strawberry or not a strong you
don't hear you don't have degrees of
strawberry pneus not really not in the
same way that you have degrees of
loudness or degrees of brightness when
it comes to light sometimes people try
to imply but they can detect more or
less score bonus or more chocolate pneus
but when they do scientific experiments
on this the we don't really that doesn't
really come through if you give someone
a small amount of chocolate min a large
minute or it's very hard to tell anyway
we don't need to go into that now I sent
to the oldest sense because even
bacteria seemingly have a sense of smell
a bacteria that detects chemicals in its
environment will move towards that if
that chemical happens to be a food
source that all move away if it happens
to be a poison so every single living
thing appears to have a sense of smell
including plans weirdly taste is kind of
like smell there are five types of taste
they used to be only for taught to
school students those four were sweet
sour salty and bitter and then we learnt
about a fifth sort and you can look this
one up it's the taste of msg and it's
got the name umami and umami is a
Japanese word and it means I think it
means something like taste like meat so
perception basically all of those senses
there is very much an activity of the
brain brains as well as sense organs are
prone to mistakes a bad data collectors
so our sensors are unreliable well we
should say they're not going to give us
perfect
information okay things can go wrong has
the light enters our eyes it might not
get might not get perfectly transmitted
to our retina and it might not get
perfectly transmitted from there to our
brain that's one problem another problem
is the idea of optical illusions so here
I've got a link so you might want to
just type that into your browser so you
can pause the video here type it into
your browser unfortunately can't click
on work with this is a video and have a
go there just have a look at the look at
the illusion and then you can restart
the video again so there's all sorts of
places on the internet to find out
explanations for optical illusions and
what's going on an optical illusions
happen this particular link is to a
quite well renowned researcher in the
area and he has collected together a
huge number of the optical illusions
including some of the ones that you just
saw so you might want to look up some
explanations of those just have try and
find some of your favorite ones their
optical illusions reveal all sorts of
things about our our sensor perceptions
what I'd like you to do is an exercise
it's just to go to Monte connect find me
in the journal section of the top page
on want to connect click on me and
respond to my question there you can use
your sponsor as a journal entry if you
can't find it allows you to try then
perhaps just log into your journal and
write a little bit about optical
illusions and what the consequences of
optical illusions are for sense
perception for knowledge my ideas on
that and you're all the milk and have
your own ideas on this is that optical
illusions illustrate that our sense of
sight for example is very much about
what our brains processing images as
well as I for saving images are doing ok
so the eyes receiving images things
might go wrong but our brains okay there
can can
uh just misunderstand stuff now Neil
deGrasse Tyson the astrophysicists the
god did cosmos he has a wonderful quote
where he refers to optical illusions not
as optical illusions he said we
shouldn't call them optical illusions we
should call them brain failures because
that's what they are okay and so he
speaks about how our brains are just
this catalog of ways of getting stuff
wrong about the world and so we are poor
data collecting devices let's not worry
about going to the next slide I'll just
leave it right here for today so yeah if
you haven't already go to the journal
section and write down your thoughts
about optical illusions and sense
perception thanks very much